# Simple real time analytics demo (WIP)

## Objective 
To build a simple example of getting real time analytics (mean and standard deviation) of a simulated IoT sensor values (temperature/soil nitrogen content/moisture content etc). 

## Constraint
All the values generated since the sensor began operation are not stored in a database (we can choose to store them too, millions of entries too can be easily manageable by modern databases). Only the final analytics outputs are stored. Also the computation mechanism must accommodate for moving mean and standard deviation which should be the same as the true mean and std dev if we stored all the sensor values but there is no big machine available with enough RAM to accommodate millions of values generated by the sensor over time, hence the calculations must support an incremental approach. 

## Assumptions
The sensor operates 24/7 and it will work forever.

## Sample output
Coming soon...

## What I aim to learn out of this pet project
Basics of Data Engineering using queue based solutions and an intuitive solution for incremental and real time analytics. Some math about the incremental mean and std dev. Also socketio.

## Methodology
We simulate an IoT sensor producing some value at fixed time intervals and our aim is to build a system which is real time in nature and provides us with the mean and standard deviation of the values generated till date. As per the constraints, we can't store all values generated so we must simulate streaming analytics with incremental updates. We use special formulas for mean and std dev calculations which support incoming new data (1 data point) and their output equals to the actual mean and std dev if all values are stored. The generation process is a simple random number generation written in python which acts as a Producer for the queue. The producer throws all the values on the queue (we use kafka as the event bus here). A consumer on the other end subscribes to this queue, listens to incoming messages, consumes them, does the calculation and stores them in a database (redis). These values are also then published to another queue which is meant for the updates to be sent to a simple websocket based Javascript backend server. A simple frontend displays the mean and standard deviation in an updating fashion with a socket.io connection.   

## Tech stack used
* Python for writing the producer and consumer codebase. 
* Javacript (node & express) for the socketio backend.
* React for the frontend.
* Kafka as an event bus (can easily use RabbitMQ, NATS, NATS streaming, redis pub/sub etc. instead)
* Redis as a database
* Docker to containerize all individual deplyoments
* Kubernetes (k3s) for orchestration

# Steps to follow along and replicate this project are as follows

All these modules can be run in a single machine. I run all this in a Google Cloud VM with 2 vCPU and 7.5 GB RAM with Ubuntu 18.04. 
Note: All these steps must be followed in the given order or we might see a lot of errors

## Prerequisites
* Docker - [Installation steps](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-install-and-use-docker-on-ubuntu-18-04)

## Installing k3s
K3s is a lightweight version of the Kubernetes (K8s) API made to work on edge devices (IoT systems) such as a raspberry pi but it works perfectly well in a normal system.

Navigate to the following website: https://k3s.io/ and follow the steps given right on the first page to install it

If you see the following error: 

`
WARN[0000] Unable to read /etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml, please start server with --write-kubeconfig-mode to modify kube config permissions 
error: error loading config file "/etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml": open /etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml: permission denied
`

Follow the steps given in [this answer](https://devops.stackexchange.com/questions/16043/error-error-loading-config-file-etc-rancher-k3s-k3s-yaml-open-etc-rancher) to set the permissions the right way


## Installing and configuring helm
Helm is a package manager for kubernetes - analogous to pip for python.

Just follow the steps mentioned here: https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/

Note: The older helm client (v2) required to create a service account - tiller (remote component) to be able to create deployments in the kubernetes cluster, now its not needed.


## Running a local docker container registry
There could be times that we need to upload our docker images to some private registry due to propreitory work or secret assets. I generally use google cloud's registry but if you don't have a cloud provision, you can configure your own registry running in the same machine from where kubernetes can pull the docker images. 

We can simply deploy our docker registry in our machine using the following command:

```
$ docker run -d -p 5000:5000 --restart=always --name registry registry:2
```

To verify if the registry is up and running run

```

$ docker ps
```

The output should look something like this:

```
CONTAINER ID   IMAGE        COMMAND                  CREATED         STATUS         PORTS                                       NAMES
2b3ee4a79eb5   registry:2   "/entrypoint.sh /etc…"   2 minutes ago   Up 2 minutes   0.0.0.0:5000->5000/tcp, :::5000->5000/tcp   registry
```

If you get any errors, google up the error - most of the docker errors are solved on Stack Overflow.
These steps are from https://docs.docker.com/registry/deploying/ where you might find extra steps to secure this registry.

## Deploying kafka in the k3s cluster
We use helm to install a kafka deployment in our cluster to save us the hassles of doing a custom kubernetes deployment (no good sources on the internet seems to have good documentation to deploy kafka in kubernetes using k8s manifests)

First add the bitnami repo where the official kafka chart resides
```
$ helm repo add bitnami https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami
```
Then go ahead and install kafka in the cluster
```
$ helm install my-release bitnami/kafka
```

The output should look something like this:
```
NAME: my-release
LAST DEPLOYED: Sat Jul 16 16:55:52 2022
NAMESPACE: default
STATUS: deployed
REVISION: 1
TEST SUITE: None
NOTES:
CHART NAME: kafka
CHART VERSION: 18.0.3
APP VERSION: 3.2.0

** Please be patient while the chart is being deployed **

Kafka can be accessed by consumers via port 9092 on the following DNS name from within your cluster:

    my-release-kafka.default.svc.cluster.local

Each Kafka broker can be accessed by producers via port 9092 on the following DNS name(s) from within your cluster:

    my-release-kafka-0.my-release-kafka-headless.default.svc.cluster.local:9092

To create a pod that you can use as a Kafka client run the following commands:

    kubectl run my-release-kafka-client --restart='Never' --image docker.io/bitnami/kafka:3.2.0-debian-11-r12 --namespace default --command -- sleep infinity
    kubectl exec --tty -i my-release-kafka-client --namespace default -- bash

    PRODUCER:
        kafka-console-producer.sh \
            
            --broker-list my-release-kafka-0.my-release-kafka-headless.default.svc.cluster.local:9092 \
            --topic test

    CONSUMER:
        kafka-console-consumer.sh \
            
            --bootstrap-server my-release-kafka.default.svc.cluster.local:9092 \
            --topic test \
            --from-beginning
```

After a few minutes we can check if the kafka deployments are ready to use
Run the following command to keep checking the status and the output should have the status "Running" for both zookeeper and kafka pods
```
$ kubectl get pods
NAME                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
my-release-zookeeper-0   1/1     Running   0          2m47s
my-release-kafka-0       1/1     Running   0          2m47s
```
The same instructions to deploy kafka can be found in the official bitnami helm charts documentations: https://bitnami.com/stack/kafka/helm

## Deploying redis in the k3s cluster
We deploy redis in a similar way we deployed kafka - using helm

The following command deploys a replicaset of redis in the cluster:

```
$ helm install my-redis bitnami/redis
NAME: my-redis
LAST DEPLOYED: Sat Jul 16 17:38:29 2022
NAMESPACE: default
STATUS: deployed
REVISION: 1
TEST SUITE: None
NOTES:
CHART NAME: redis
CHART VERSION: 17.0.1
APP VERSION: 7.0.3

** Please be patient while the chart is being deployed **

Redis&reg; can be accessed on the following DNS names from within your cluster:

    my-redis-master.default.svc.cluster.local for read/write operations (port 6379)
    my-redis-replicas.default.svc.cluster.local for read-only operations (port 6379)



To get your password run:

    export REDIS_PASSWORD=$(kubectl get secret --namespace default my-redis -o jsonpath="{.data.redis-password}" | base64 -d)

To connect to your Redis&reg; server:

1. Run a Redis&reg; pod that you can use as a client:

   kubectl run --namespace default redis-client --restart='Never'  --env REDIS_PASSWORD=$REDIS_PASSWORD  --image docker.io/bitnami/redis:7.0.3-debian-11-r0 --command -- sleep infinity

   Use the following command to attach to the pod:

   kubectl exec --tty -i redis-client \
   --namespace default -- bash

2. Connect using the Redis&reg; CLI:
   REDISCLI_AUTH="$REDIS_PASSWORD" redis-cli -h my-redis-master
   REDISCLI_AUTH="$REDIS_PASSWORD" redis-cli -h my-redis-replicas

To connect to your database from outside the cluster execute the following commands:

    kubectl port-forward --namespace default svc/my-redis-master 6379:6379 &
    REDISCLI_AUTH="$REDIS_PASSWORD" redis-cli -h 127.0.0.1 -p 6379
```

In a few seconds or minutes, we must see the redis deployments running along with the already deployed kafka:
```
kubectl get pods
NAME                     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
my-release-zookeeper-0   1/1     Running   0          43m
my-release-kafka-0       1/1     Running   0          43m
my-redis-replicas-0      0/1     Running   0          40s
my-redis-master-0        1/1     Running   0          40s
```

## Running the producer in the k3s cluster
This is a simple python random number generator pushing values to a kafka topic/queue mimicking/simulating actual sensor values received from a sensor (eg: nitrogen content soil sensor) at certain time intervals (10 seconds in our case)


First build the docker image and tag it
```
docker build -t localhost:5000/pykaf-producer:v1 .
```

Push the image to the registry for k3s to pick it up

```
docker push localhost:5000/pykaf-producer:v1
```

Once pushed, deploy the producer in the cluster 


## Running the consumer in the k3s cluster




## Testing the event flow between the producer and consumer flow

## Deploying the socketio backend in the k3s cluster and creating the service

## Deploying the frontend in the k3s cluster and creating the service

##


## Output


## TODO


## Word of caution
This is by no means a production level codebase and system design. If running locally, this system might slow down your computer even with 16 GB RAM, so be careful while deploying it.


## Helpful links
* [Socketio integration with kafkajs](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/66337792/how-do-i-connect-kafkajs-with-socket-io)